htfgen 
------

This is a set of tools to simplify creation of `htf` fonts for `tex4ht`.

## Installation

    cd `kpsewhich -var-value TEXMFHOME`
    mkdir -p tex/latex
    cd tex/latex
    git clone https://github.com/michal-h21/htfgen.git
    cd htfgen
    tex makeenc.tex
    chmod +x lstexenc
    chmod +x tfmtochars
    chmod +x htfgen
    chmod +x dvitohtf
    chmod +x scanfdfile
    chmod +x make-t1-htf 
    ln -s /full/path/to/thisdir/lstexenc /usr/local/bin/lstexenc
    ln -s /full/path/to/thisdir/tfmtochars /usr/local/bin/tfmtochars
    ln -s /full/path/to/thisdir/htfgen /usr/local/bin/htfgen
    ln -s /full/path/to/thisdir/dvitohtf /usr/local/bin/dvitohtf
    ln -s /full/path/to/thisdir/scanfdfile /usr/local/bin/scanfdfile
    ln -s /full/path/to/thisdir/make-t1-htf /usr/local/bin/make-t1-htf

## Introduction


Objective of Htfgen is to automatize the creation of the HTF font mapping files.
These files are used by tex4ht to map character codes in the DVI files to
Unicode.  

There are two main scripts: `scanfdfile` and `dvitohtf`. The first one searches for
declared fonts in the `FD` files, the other generates literate TeX file for the `HTF`
generation. Sample usage is as follows:

    cat /usr/local/texlive/2018/texmf-dist/tex/latex/ebgaramond/*.fd | scanfdfile | dvitohtf > ebgaramont-htf.tex
    tex ebgaramont-htf.tex

This will create `HTF` files for all detected fonts defined in `FD` files for EB Garamond.

`dvitohtf` can also generate `HTF` files for missing fonts in the `DVI` file.
So if `tex4ht` reports missing `HTF` files, it can be used directly on the `DVI`
file:

   dvitohtf sample.dvi > missing.tex
   tex missing.tex

`dvitohtf` supports both virtual and `tfm` fonts. It looks for virtual fonts
first, the `tfm` file is used only when no `vf` is found. It looks for all
fonts referenced in the virtual font and tries to look for corresponding `.enc`
files in `pdftex.map`. The `.enc` files contain glyph lists, which are then mapped
to Unicode. 

It also parses the `.pfb` file for font family name and tries to detect style
(italic, bold, small caps) from the font full name saved in the `.pfb` file.

It computes hashes for the font tables, so duplicate font tables aren't
written, the fonts with same characters just link to the first used font.

If no `.enc` file is found, then the font cannot be supported. There can be
also missing mappings between glyphs and Unicode. The missing mappings are
reported in the TeX file.  Htfgen contains large mapping files, but some fonts
just use some custom glyphs which doesn't have Unicode equivalent. For example
`Q_u` ligatures etc. In this case the mapping must be added by hand to
`glyphlists/glyphlist-fixes.txt`.

It works reasonably well for fonts generated by Fontinst, because they usually
use standard glyph names, contains `.enc` files, etc. For complex virtual fonts,
especially math, it fails. `HTF` files for such fonts still needs to be created
by hand.

## Find font families in LaTeX packages

Use the `listfonts.lua` script to find `.fd` files required by a LaTeX package like `times` or `bookman`

    texlua listfonts.lua times avant bookman | xargs cat  | scanfdfile | dvitohtf

## Update the `tex4ht` literate sources

It is possible to update the literate source file using the
`update_literate_sources.lua` script. It takes list of `.htf` file as an
argument and reads the source from standard input.

     texlua update_literate_sources.lua `ls *.htf`  < tex4ht-fonts-noncjk.tex  > tex4ht-fonts-noncjk-updated.tex

It is useful for updating already existing fonts in the sources.

# Obsolete information

## Simple usage

If all what you need is to add support for normal text font encoded in T1
fontenc, you may try to use the `make-t1-htf` script. 

Lets say that you have following file:


    \documentclass{article}
    
    \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
    \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
    
    %\usepackage{dejavu}
    \renewcommand{\familydefault}{\sfdefault}
    \usepackage[defaultsans]{droidsans}
    \newcommand\sample{Příliš žluťoučký kůň úpěl ďábelské ódy. \% ``Nazdar světě''}
    
    \begin{document}
    
    \sample
    
    \textit{\sample}
    
    \textbf{\sample}
    
    \textsc{\sample}
    
    \texttt{\sample}
    
    \end{document}

Then you will get lot of warnings in the terminal output about missing `.htf`
files:

    --- warning --- Couldn't find font `DroidSans-t1.htf' (char codes: 0--255)

because T1 encoded fonts should produce identical output, we don't need to
create full `.htf` file with char table, but we can create file which points to
some existing full `.htf` file in `T1` encoding. This file has such form:

    .lm-ec

dot on the first line indicated that this points to file `lm-ec.htf`, which is
`.htf` file for Latin Modern in `T1` encoding. 

We can add also some CSS information to the file, with this instruction:

    .lm-ec
    htfcss: DroidSans-Bold-t1 font-weight:bold; font-family: 'Droid Sans', sans-serif

first entry after `htfcss` is the font name, which is also used as CSS `class`.
Then CSS instructions follows. 

To simplify creation of this light `.htf` file, `make-t1-htf` script is
provided. The usage is following:

    usage: maket1htf fontname [style] [family]

available styles are rm for normal text, it -- italic, b -- bold and sc --
small-caps

The sample `.htf` file was created with command: 

    $ make-t1-htf DroidSans-Bold-t1 b "'Droid Sans', sans-serif"

## Usage

First, we need to figure out, whether tested font is virtual. Virtual fonts aren't supported at the moment. 

    lstexenc fontname

for `tfm` font, we get something like:

    $ lstexenc eccc1000
    eccc1000        tfm     EXTENDED TEX FONT ENCODING - LATIN

for virtual font, the outpus is like this:

    $ lstexenc ntxmia 
    ntxmia	vf	FONTSPECIFIC
      txmia	tfm	FONTSPECIFIC
      txsyc	tfm	FONTSPECIFIC
      txr	vf	TEX TEXT
        rtxptmr	tfm	TEXBASE1ENCODING
        rtxr	tfm	FONTSPECIFIC
      ntxexb	tfm	UNSPECIFIED
      rtxmio	tfm	FONTSPECIFIC
      zxlr-8r	tfm	TEXBASE1ENCODING
      ptmr8r	tfm	TEXBASE1ENCODING
      zxxrl7z	tfm	ADOBESTANDARDENCODING
    
first entry on each line is a font name, second font type and third is font 
encoding. Font encoding information provided by fonts is unreliable!

If font type is `tfm`, we can process to another step, which is translation of
8-bit characters to unicode characters using glyph info encoded in `enc` or 
`afm` files.

`tfmtochars` script is used to generate `tsv` file with char number, glyph name
and hex unicode value.

    $ tfmtochars fontname [enc]

`tfmtochars` tries to find `enc` file in `map` files provided by `pdftex`, you
need to provide the name only in the case the `enc` file is not configured for
given font.

    $ tfmtochars eccc1000
    0	grave	0060
    1	acute	00B4
    2	circumflex	02C6
    ...
    253	yacute	00FD
    254	thorn	00FE
    255	germandbls	00DF

for some fonts, `enc` file can't be found:

    $ tfmtochars zxxrl7z
    Cannot load enc file for txmia

You may try to find a enc file by hand (Google?). Common `enc` names can be 
found in [fontname guide](http://ftp.math.utah.edu/pub/tex/historic/fonts/fontname/fontname-2.2/fontname_5.html#SEC22). 

From `lstexenc zxxrl7z` we know that this font uses `ADOBESTANDARDENCODING`, which is coded as `8a`:

    $ tfmtochars zxxrl7z 8a 

we should control, whether the output is correct (`nil` values instead 
of hexadecimal codes are suspicious). We may use 

    $ tfmtochars zxxrl7z 8a | grep nil

to test that. If the output is correct, we need to save the output to the 
`tsv` file, with command:


    $ tfmtochars zxxrl7z 8a > zxxrl7z.zsv

now we can generate the `htf` file with `htfgen`

    $ htfgen zxxrl7z.tsv > zxxrl7z.htf

To test the `htf` file, you can use `testfont.lua` script:

    $ texlua testfont.lua zxxrl7z

and compare the resulting `pdf` and `html` files. Note that occasionally some
characters in either `pdf` or `html` files are missing, I am not sure why.


## Issues

### math fonts are mess

Math fonts with calligraphic features such as fraktur or scripts doesn't 
reflect these styles in glyph names, so it is impossible to automatically 
reflect these features. See [unicode math symbols](http://milde.users.sourceforge.net/LUCR/Math/unimathsymbols.xhtml)
for unicode values of these features. You may need to correct unicode hex codes
in the `tsv` file by hand. Any ideas how to solve that automatically will be
really appreciated.

### parse afm files when no enc is found

We may parse afm files for glyph names, when no encoding is found or provided.
Not all fonts does have `afm` files, though.

### virtual fonts

My idea is following: 

- first we need to make `tsv` files for all referenced fonts
- then make new `tsv` with referenced characters from particular `tsv` files
- sometimes character in the virtual font is composed from more characters from
one or more referenced fonts. It is unlikely that this can be solved 
automatically

### Some symbols in TeX fonts doesn't have unicode characters


